Release notes YDB Server 25.1.2 (#18929)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/changelog-server.md

* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12909) automatic integrity checks of backups during import, which prevent restoration from corrupted backups and protect against data loss.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15570) the ability to create views that refer to [UDFs](./yql/reference/builtins/basic.md#udf) in queries.
* Added system views with information about [access right settings](./dev/system-views.md#auth), [history of overloaded partitions](./dev/system-views.md#top-overload-partitions), [history of partitions with broken locks](./dev/system-views#top-tli-partitions).
* Added new parameters to the [CREATE USER](./yql/reference/syntax/create-user.md) and [ALTER USER](./yql/reference/syntax/alter-user.md) operators:
  * `HASH` — sets a password in encrypted form.
  * `LOGIN` and `NOLOGIN` — unlocks and blocks a user, respectively.
* Enhanced account security:
  * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11963) user [password complexity](./reference/configuration/auth_config#password-complexity) verification.

>   * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12578) [automatic user lockout](./reference/configuration/auth_config#account-lockout) after a specified number of failed attempts to enter the correct password.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12578) [automatic user lockout](./reference/configuration/auth_config.md#account-lockout) after a specified number of failed attempts to enter the correct password.
```

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 25.1 {#25-1}

### Release candidate 25.1.2.7 {#25-1-2-7}

Release date: 2025.

#### Functionality

> * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/19504) a [vector index](./dev/vector-indexes.md) for approximate vector similarity search. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_vector_index` flag in the [cluster configuration](./reference/configuration/index.md), but rolling back to previous {{ ydb-short-name }} versions won't be possible after this.

Author: @azevaykin Саш, статью про векторные индексы https://ydb.tech/docs/ru/dev/vector-indexes?version=main нужно замержить в stable-25-1

> * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/11454) support for consistent [asynchronous replication](./concepts/async-replication.md).

Author: @CyberROFL Версия статьи в main и stable-25-1 отличается: 
https://ydb.tech/docs/ru/concepts/async-replication?version=main
https://ydb.tech/docs/ru/concepts/async-replication?version=v25.1

Обновите, пожалуйста в 25.1. После релиза дока будет переключена на эту ветку.

* Added support for the parameterized [Decimal type](./yql/reference/types/primitive.md#numeric).
* [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/18017) client balancing of partitions when reading using the [Kafka protocol](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#consumerconfigs_partition.assignment.strategy) (like Kafka itself). Previously, balancing took place on the server. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_kafka_native_balancing` flag in the cluster configuration.
* Added support for [auto-partitioning topics](./concepts/cdc.md#topic-partitions) for row-oriented tables in CDC. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_topic_autopartitioning_for_cdc` flag in the cluster configuration.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/8264) the ability to [alter the retention period of CDC topics](./concepts/cdc.md#topic-settings) using the `ALTER TOPIC` statement.
* [Added support](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/7052) for [the `DEBEZIUM_JSON` format](./concepts/cdc.md#debezium-json-record-structure) for CDC.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/19507) the ability to create changefeed streams to index tables.

> * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/19310) the ability to [enable followers (read replicas)](./yql/reference/syntax/alter_table/indexes.md) for covered secondary indexes. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_access_to_index_impl_tables` flag in the cluster configuration.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/21074

* The scope of supported objects in backup and restore operations has been expanded:
  * [Support for changefeeds](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/7054) (enabled with the `enable_changefeeds_export` and `enable_changefeeds_import` flags).
  * [Support for views](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/12724) (enabled with the `enable_view_export` flag).
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/17734) automatic cleanup of temporary tables and directories during export to S3. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_export_auto_dropping` flag in the cluster configuration.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12909) automatic integrity checks of backups during import, which prevent restoration from corrupted backups and protect against data loss.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15570) the ability to create views that refer to [UDFs](./yql/reference/builtins/basic.md#udf) in queries.

> * Added system views with information about [access right settings](./dev/system-views.md#auth), [history of overloaded partitions](./dev/system-views.md#top-overload-partitions), [history of partitions with broken locks](./dev/system-views#top-tli-partitions).

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/20932

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

# Version 25.1 {#25-1}

## Version 25.1.1 {#25-1-1-}

Release date: 2025.

### Functionality

* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/11454) support for consistent [asynchronous replication](./concepts/async-replication.md).

> * Added support for parameterized Decimal type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Added support for the parameterized Decimal type.
```

* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12909) automatic integrity check of backups during import, which prevents restoration from corrupted backups and protects against data loss.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15570) ability to create VIEWs that refer to [UDF](./yql/reference/builtins/basic.md#udf) in queries.
* Added system views with information about [access rights settings](./dev/system-views#auth) and [partitions of tables](./dev/system-views.md#partitions).
* Added new parameters to [CREATE USER](./yql/reference/syntax/create-user.md) and [ALTER USER](./yql/reference/syntax/alter-user.md) operators:
  * `HASH` - ability to set password in encrypted form,
  * `LOGIN` and `NOLOGIN` - unlock and block user.
* Enhanced account security:
  * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11963) user password complexity verification.
  * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12578) automatic user blocking when password attempt limit is exhausted.
  * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12983) ability for users to change their own passwords.

> * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/9748) ability to switch functional flags at runtime. Flags for which the parameter `(RequireRestart) = true` is not specified in the [proto file](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/main/ydb/core/protos/feature_flags.proto#L60) will be applied without requiring a restart.

Reviewer 3: functional flag или feature flag?

* [Optimized](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15264) memory consumption by storage nodes.
* [Optimized](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/10969) Hive startup time.
* [Optimized](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/6561) replication process.
* [Optimized](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9491) header size of large binary objects in VDisk.
* Improved diagnostics and introspection of memory errors.
* Reduced memory consumption through allocator page cleaning.

### Bug Fixes

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9707) an error in [Interconnect](../concepts/glossary#actor-system-interconnect) configuration that led to performance degradation.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/13993) out of memory error when deleting very large tables by regulating the number of tablets simultaneously processing this operation.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9848) handling of accidental duplicate nodes in system tablet config.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11059) an error of long (seconds) data reading during frequent table resharding operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11059) an issue where reading data would take too long (seconds) during frequent table resharding operations.
```

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9723) an error in reading from asynchronous replicas that led to failure.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9507) rare [CDC](./dev/cdc.md) initial scan freezing.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11483) handling of incomplete schema transactions in datashards during system restart.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/10460) an error of inconsistent reading from a topic when trying to explicitly confirm a message read within a transaction. Now the user will receive an error when attempting to confirm a message.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12220) an error where auto-partitioning worked incorrectly when working with a topic within a transaction.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12220) an issue where topic auto-partitioning worked incorrectly within a transaction.
```

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12905) transaction hangs when working with topics during tablet restarts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12905) an issue where a transaction hangs when working with topics during tablet restarts.
```

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16635) an error in executing the `RETURNING` expression in INSERT/UPSERT operations.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16269) an issue with Drop Tablet operations in the PQ tablet hanging, especially during Interconnect delays.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16194) an error that occurred during VDisk [compaction](../concepts/glossary#compaction).
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15233) an issue where long topic reading sessions ended with "too big inflight" errors.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15515) an issue where reading a topic by multiple consumers would hang if at least one partition had no incoming data.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/18614) a rare issue with PQ tablet restarts.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/18378) an issue where, after updating the cluster version, Hive started subscribers in data centers without running database nodes.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/19057) a bug "Failed to set up listener on port 9092 errno# 98 (Address already in use)" that occurs when updating the version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/19057) an issue where the "Failed to set up listener on port 9092 errno# 98 (Address already in use)" error would occur when updating the version.
```

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/18905) an error that led to a segmentation fault when simultaneously executing a request to healthcheck and disabling the cluster node.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/18899) crash in [partitioning row-oriented tables](./concepts/datamodel/table#partitioning_row_table) when selecting split key from access samples containing a mix of full key and key prefix operations (e.g. exact/range reads).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/18899) an issue that caused partitioning of [row-oriented tables](./concepts/datamodel/table#partitioning_row_table) to fail when a split key was selected from access samples containing a mix of full key and key prefix operations (such as exact and range reads).
```

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 25.1 {#25-1}

### Version 25.1.1.18 {#25-1-1-18}

Release date: 2025.

> #### Functionality

Reviewer: ❗Why is there no vector search stuff? If we're not releasing it yet, even as experimental under a feature flag, we'd better remove documentation about it from the `stable-25-1` branch.

* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/11454) support for consistent [asynchronous replication](./concepts/async-replication.md).
* Added support for the parameterized [Decimal type](./yql/reference/types/primitive.md#numeric).

> * Added support for [auto-partitioning topics](./concepts/cdc.md#topic-partitions) for row-oriented tables in CDC. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_topic_autopartitioning_for_cdc` flag in the [cluster configuration](./maintenance/manual/dynamic-config#obnovlenie-dinamicheskoj-konfiguracii).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Added support for [auto-partitioning topics](./concepts/cdc.md#topic-partitions) for row-oriented tables in CDC. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_topic_autopartitioning_for_cdc` flag in the [cluster configuration](./maintenance/manual/dynamic-config.md).
```

* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/8264) the ability to [alter the retention period of CDC topics](./concepts/cdc.md#topic-settings) using the `ALTER TOPIC` expression.
* [Added support](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/7052) for [the DEBEZIUM_JSON format](./concepts/cdc.md#debezium-json-record-structure) for CDC, which can be enabled by setting the `enable_changefeed_debezium_json_format` flag.
* The scope of supported objects in backup and restore operations has been expanded:
  * [Support for changefeeds](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/7054) (enabled with the `enable_changefeeds_export` and `enable_changefeeds_import` flags).
  * [Support for views](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/12724) (enabled with the `enable_view_export` flag).
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12909) automatic integrity check of backups during import, which prevents restoration from corrupted backups and protects against data loss.

> * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15570) the ability to create views that refer to [UDF](./yql/reference/builtins/basic.md#udf) in queries.

Reviewer: The documentation link doesn't match what the feature does: it needs to link to the documentation about what's allowed in views and what's not.

> * Added system views with information about [access right settings](./dev/system-views.md#auth) and [history of overloaded partitions](./dev/system-views.md#top-overload-partitions).

Reviewer: Mention the names of these system views.

* Added new parameters to the [CREATE USER](./yql/reference/syntax/create-user.md) and [ALTER USER](./yql/reference/syntax/alter-user.md) operators:
  * `HASH` — set a password in the encrypted form.
  * `LOGIN` and `NOLOGIN` — unlock and block a user.
* Enhanced account security:

>   * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11963) user password complexity verification.

Reviewer: Missing documentation link.

>   * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12578) automatic user lockout after a specified number of failed attempts to enter the correct password.

Reviewer: Missing documentation link.

>   * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12983) the ability for users to change their own passwords.

Reviewer: Missing documentation link.

> * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/9748) the ability to toggle functional flags at runtime. Changes to the flags, for which the `(RequireRestart) = true` parameter  is not specified in the [proto file](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/blob/main/ydb/core/protos/feature_flags.proto#L60), will be applied without a restart.

Reviewer: Why functional flags? These are usually called feature flags.

> * [Changed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11329) lock behavior when the number of locks on shards exceeds the limit. Now, once the limit is exceeded, the oldest locks (rather than the newest) are converted into full-shard locks.

Reviewer: Link to https://ydb.tech/docs/en/concepts/limits-ydb and ensure this limit is documented.

* [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12567) a mechanism to preserve optimistic locks in memory when datashards are gracefully restarted, which should reduce the number of ABORTED errors due to lock loss during table balancing between nodes.
* [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12689) a mechanism to abort volatile transactions with the ABORTED status when datashards are gracefully restarted.

> * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/6342) the ability to remove NOT NULL constraints on a column in a table using the `ALTER TABLE _ ALTER COLUMN _ DROP NOT NULL` query.

Reviewer: Missing documentation link

> * [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9168) the 100.000 limit on the number of simultaneous requests to create sessions in the coordination service.

Reviewer: Link to https://ydb.tech/docs/en/concepts/limits-ydb and ensure this limit is documented.

> * [Increased](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/14219) the maximum [number of columns in the primary key](./concepts/limits-ydb.md?#schema-object) from 20 to 30.

Reviewer: The documentation this links to still says the limit is 20.

* **_(Experimental)_** [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/14075) strict access control checks, which are enabled by setting the `enable_strict_acl_check` flag and the following ones:
  * `enable_strict_user_management` enables strict checks for local users.
  * `enable_database_admin` enables database administrator functions.

>   * `enable_data_erasure` [enables](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/14460) a procedure that repeatedly overwrites deleted data to minimize the risk of recovering the deleted information when directly accessing block devices via operating system functions.

Reviewer: Missing documentation links + afaik the "data erasure" feature is currently being renamed due to naming conflict with erasure coding.

#### Backward incompatible changes

> * If you are using [temporal over YDB](https://github.com/yandex/temporal-over-ydb), update it to version [v1.23.0-ydb-compat](https://github.com/yandex/temporal-over-ydb/releases/tag/v1.23.0-ydb-compat) before updating YDB to the current version to avoid errors in query execution.

Reviewer: ❗As far as I understand, this project just queries YDB in some way via the Go SDK. If it's no longer compatible, then some behavior of YDB visible via the public API has changed. This behavior change needs to be documented, not just the need to update an external project. Otherwise, any other client doing similar queries would get broken too, without a clear warning and instructions to avoid or fix.

#### Performance

* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/6509) support for [constant folding](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constant_folding) in the query optimizer by default, which improves query performance by evaluating constant expressions at compilation time. This feature reduces runtime overhead, enabling faster and more efficient query execution for complex static expressions.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/6512) a granular timecast protocol that will reduce the execution time of distributed transactions (slowing down one shard will not cause all shards to slow down).
* [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/11561) in-memory state migration on graceful restart, which allows preserving locks and increasing the chances of successful transaction execution. This reduces the execution time of long transactions by decreasing the number of retries.
* [Optimized](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15264) memory consumption by storage nodes.

> * [Improved](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/10969) Hive startup times.

Reviewer: Some numbers on the expected improvement would be helpful.

Author: @vporyadke мы можем тут оперировать какими-то цифрами?  ^^^

Reviewer 4: Да, именно "до 30%".

* [Optimized](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/6561) the replication process.
* [Optimized](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9491) the header size of large binary objects in VDisk.

> * Improved diagnostics and introspection of memory errors.

Reviewer: Diagnostics and introspections sounds like a feature, not a performance improvement. Missing documentation link.

> * Reduced memory consumption through allocator page cleaning.

Reviewer: Missing PR links

Author: @abyss7 поможешь со ссылкой на PR?

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/9507) an issue with rare [CDC](./dev/cdc.md) initial scan freezes.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/11483) an issue with handling incomplete schema transactions in datashards during system restart.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/10460) an issue with inconsistent reading from a topic when trying to explicitly confirm a message read within a transaction. Now the user will receive an error when attempting to confirm a message.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12220) an issue where topic auto-partitioning worked incorrectly within a transaction.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/12905) an issue where a transaction hangs when working with topics during tablet restarts.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/13910) the "Key is out of range" error when importing data from S3-compatible storage.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/13741) an issue where the end of the metadata field in the [dynamic cluster configuration](../maintenance/manual/dynamic-config) was determined incorrectly.

> * [Improved](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16420) the process of building secondary indices: when certain errors occur, the system retries the process instead of interrupting it.

Reviewer: 1. This sounds more like a feature than a bugfix.
2. Mention the specific errors that are now retried.

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16635) an error in executing the `RETURNING` expression in INSERT/UPSERT operations.

Reviewer: The impact of the unclear: incorrect results, or can't execute at all?

* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16269) an issue with Drop Tablet operations in the PQ tablet hanging, especially during Interconnect delays.
* [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/16194) an error that occurred during VDisk [compaction](../concepts/glossary#compaction).

> * [Fixed](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15233) an issue where long topic reading sessions ended with "too big inflight" errors.

Reviewer: bettter quote a more complete error message in backticks so this has better chances to be found by the error message

# {{ ydb-short-name }} Server changelog

## Version 25.1 {#25-1}

### Version 25.1.2.6 {#25-1-2-6}

Release date: 2025.

#### Functionality

* [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/19504) a [vector index](./dev/vector-indexes.md) for approximate vector search. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_vector_index` flag in the [cluster configuration](./maintenance/manual/dynamic-config) under the guarantee of not rolling back to previous versions.
* [Added](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/11454) support for consistent [asynchronous replication](./concepts/async-replication.md).
* [Implemented] BATCH UPDATE and BATCH DELETE expressions, allowing to apply changes to large string tables outside of transactional constraints.
* Added support for the parameterized [Decimal type](./yql/reference/types/primitive.md#numeric).

> * [Implemented](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/issues/18017) client balancing of partitions when reading using the [Kafka protocol](https://kafka.apache.org/documentation/#consumerconfigs_partition.assignment.strategy) (like Kafka itself). Previously, balancing took place on the server. This mode is enabled by setting the `enable_kafka_native_balancing` flag in the cluster configuration.

Author: @ElenaAfina давайте заведем задачу и договоримся про сроки, когда она будет написана
